---
id: prediction-markets
title: Prediction Markets
---

Prediction markets are openly traded markets that trade assets which are linked
to different potential future outcomes. The purpose of prediction markets is to
aggregate information from a diverse set of independent actors. Prediction
markets have been shown in numerous studies to have more accurate prediction
capabilities than other methods such as polls. The reason for this is that they
require the actors trading in the markets (AKA the informants) to put stake in
the game and allows them to profit if they are right - while risking loss if
they lose.

For a general introduction of prediction markets, it is recommended to read the
Wikipedia page on the matter. This article will explore the properties of
prediction markets that are most important for a decentralized prediction
market, of which Zeitgeist is one example.

## Background

Prediction markets can be traced back to writings of [Ludwig von Mises][mises]
and [Frederik Hayek][hayek], however it is the economist Robin Hansen that is
perhaps the best known proponent of them today. Hansen's writings have a very
significant theoretic implication on how to implement prediction markets in a
blockchain setting. He posits that the primary problem that can be solved is
that of "info problems", that is the difficulty of aggregating information among
many individuals with all different views of the subject.

### Info Problems

In Robin Hansen's paper "Shall We Vote on Values, But Bet on Beliefs?" the
author describes the core problem that prediction markets solve as democracy's
info problems. That is, there is a hole in which information should be
aggregated that leads to inefficient and non-optimal policies to be chosen.

### Speculative Markets

In relation to the info problems described above, Hansen (in the same paper)
points out that speculative markets show striking success in their ability to
aggregate information. He says "That is, active speculative markets do very well
at inducing people to acquire info, share it via trades, and collect that info
into consensus prices that persuade wider audiences."

[mises]:
  https://cdn.mises.org/Economic%20Calculation%20in%20the%20Socialist%20Commonwealth_Vol_2_3.pdf
[hayek]: https://www.kysq.org/docs/Hayek_45.pdf
